Welcome back.
We just learned about this pillar of functional programming.
The idea of a pure function where we have no side effects and the same input no matter how many times
we call it gives us the same output.
But I posed that question for you whether we can do anything without side effects because as I said
console dialogue.
Well that's a side effect.
As a matter of fact input output is a side effect that is communicating with the outside world in any
way which is what input output is.
That is not pure and the interesting thing is that with just pure functions which are just functions
that do something on the inside and the outside world knows nothing about is philosophically.
Well it doesn't do anything because a program cannot exist without side effects.
We can't run this piece of code without having a side effect of interacting with the browser.
We can't have Web sites with just pure functions can we browsers have to make fetch calls EDP calls
to the outside world.
We have to interact with the Dom and manipulate what's on the Web site so the goal of functional programming
is not to make everything pure functions.
The goal is to minimize side effects.
The idea is to organize your code with there is a specific part that has side effects but when you have
a bug you know right away to go to that spot because that's where the side effects are happening the
rest of your code.
Well those are just pure functions and because they're pure we don't have to worry about them as much
purity is more of a confidence level.
It cannot be 100 percent.
So if there's one thing that you take away from this is that side effects and impurity is not necessarily
bad but the goal is to organize your code in a way so that you isolate these side effects.
These database calls API calls input output to a certain location in your program in your code so that
your code becomes predictable and easier to bug because at the end of the day we do have to have some
sort of a global state to describe our application.
That's unavoidable.
This is just the tip of the iceberg when it comes to terminology and functional programming.
It gets really complicated and there are some really large words like Referential transparency but as
I said before at its core the essence of functional programming is very simple.
We want to build programs that are built with a bunch of very small very reusable predictable pure functions.
How do we build the perfect function.
We're going to explore that over the next couple of videos but this is a quick reference a perfect function
should do one task and one task only.
We don't want a massive function.
A simple function that we can test that does one thing really well that function should have a return
statement every function should return something from it.
Because when we give it an input we expect an output every function should be pure which we've talked
about and that also means having no shared state with other functions and immutable state where we can
modified some of the state within our functions but we always return whatever we get such as an input
we always return a new copy of that output.
We never just modify our global state functions are also going to be composing all something that we're
really going to dive deep into later on.
And most importantly we want to make functions predictable if we understand with 100 percent certainty
what our functions do it makes our code predictable.
Functional programming at the end of the day is just about making your code predictable.
Let's dive in to some key concepts and key words when it comes to functional programming.